# Tailwind Documentation

_Tailwind CSS works by scanning all of your HTML files, JavaScript components, and any other templates for class names, generating the corresponding styles and then writing them to a static CSS file._

_It's fast, flexible, and reliable — with zero-runtime._

[Read more about Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/)
## Introduction



# Getting Started


### Should I use Tailwind for my project?
In general, Tailwind is a pretty great fit for most projects. There are a few cases where you may find the framework to be less than ideal:

- WordPress sites with large amounts of third party stylesheets that include opinionated styles.

- If your site is using plugins that have opinionated markup and styles, such as: The Events Calendar, WooCommerce, etc, you may want to consider if your project has enough time/budget to account for those styles.

- If the site is already using a framework such as Bootstrap or a design system, it may be more trouble than it’s worth to include Tailwind alongside those things. Tailwind’s styles will inevitably vary or even clash with existing styles.

For best results, it is recommended to use Tailwind on new projects only. This prevents conflicts or inconsistencies with other styles or frontend frameworks that might be in use.

### How Tailwind Works

Tailwind uses `PostCSS` to generate a set of utility classes to be used in the project. The utilities generated by Tailwind support are responsive and include support for interaction states such as hover and focus. In the latest version, Tailwind uses a Just-in-Time (JIT) engine which compiles your CSS as you make changes in your template files while running `npm run watch` or after running `npm run build`.

The engine will automatically include any classes you actually use in your templates and leave out everything else while still giving you all the options to choose from up front. This allows you to rapidly build UIs while keeping performance in mind from the very beginning.

#### Writing custom classes

Tailwind allows you to author custom classes that group multiple utilities together to simplify the creation of components with frequently repeated styles (such as a button). Styles are applied to the custom class using `@apply`.

```
.my-button {
	@apply
		px-6
		py-4
		mb-2
		bg-white
		border
		border-blue-800
		hover:bg-blue-800
		hover:text-white
		rounded-lg;
}
```

Depending on the use case, you may include classes using `@apply` along with your own styles and rules/properties will output in the order you include them as well as abitrary value support. This allows you to write your styles in the way that makes the most sense while having all options available to you.

The `@apply` example above is the preferred way to handle styles for Gutenberg block development where classes are repeated in both the block editor.js file as well as the markup.php file.

Tailwind's recommended approach is to add classes directly inline on DOM elements. However, the maintainability of this is not feasible when we attempt to scale core and custom blocks. In modular areas of the site where classes do not need to be reused then inline Tailwind classes can be added directly to the markup.

Any custom classes you author that are not included inside an `@layer` rule will always be included in your CSS file’s output.

#### Creating your own Utilities and Components

When you need to add truly custom CSS rules to a Tailwind project, the approach above is easiest to add the custom CSS to your stylesheet. For more power, you can also use the @layer directive to add styles to Tailwind’s base, components, and utilities layers.

Tailwind organizes the styles it generates into three different “layers”:

- The Base layer is for things like reset rules or default styles applied to plain HTML elements.
- The Components layer is for class-based styles that you want to be able to override with utilities.
- The Utilities layer is for small, single-purpose classes that should always take precedence over any other styles.

Being explicit about this makes it easier to understand how your styles will interact with each other, and using the @layer directive lets you control the final declaration order while still organizing your actual code in whatever way you like.

For example:
```
@layer components {
	.card {
		@apply
		px-6
		py-4
		mb-2
		bg-white
		border
		border-blue-800
		rounded-lg;
	}
}
```
The example above will insert the `.card` class at the components layer, despite where it's inserted in your CSS, and you can still use utility classes to override it when necessary. The `/assets/css/frontend/tailwind/` folder contains optional files to organize any custom Tailwind utilities or components added to your project.

### Setting up VSCode for Tailwind

The [TailwindCSS IntelliSense Extension for VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bradlc.vscode-tailwindcss) will automatically pick up your configuration changes and provide simple autocompletes that even show you the CSS output of the class you wish to use.

Note: this extension has been included in a `.vscode` folder in the repo - when you first launch the project, `VSCODE` will suggest installing it for a better experience.

Another handy plugin is [VSCode for Tailwind Docs](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=austenc.tailwind-docs#:~:text=VSCode%20Tailwind%20Docs&text=To%20use%20this%20extension%2C%20simply,That's%20it!), used for when you can't remember a Tailwind class name. You can easily search the Tailwind Docs within VSCode's search using ` ⌘ + Shift + P`, just type "Tailwind Docs".

### Initial Setup Considerations

#### Customizing style values**

During setup, you'll want to review the `tailwind.config.js` file located in the theme folder and customize it to suit the needs of your project.

The Tailwind config allows you to override or extend the default theme, so you can use the parts of it you want along with whatever custom configuration you need for your project.

The Tailwind docs have several details pages that cover how to modify the default theme, use custom values, and more. See the [Theme Configuration](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/theme) article for details.

#### Enable Plugins

Review the default included plugins (Typography, Forms, Line Clamp, and Aspect Ratio) and enable the ones that make sense for your project. See FAQ for some more details.

#### Setting up default container styles

By default, the `.container` class doesn't include padding for gutters or margin for centering. So if you wanted to have a centered container with a gutter you'd do something like this:

In many cases it can be very helpful to add default padding and centering to a container so you don’t have to add several utility classes over and over. It is often helpful to have a sensible default that you can then override in cases where you do actually need to have different padding or centering behavior. This can provide a greater degree of flexibility while reducing friction during development.

```
  <div class="container mx-auto px-6 lg:px-8"> ... </div>
```

If you want all containers to be set a certain way by default, you can configure that in your `tailwind.config.js` file like the example below:

```
    module.exports = {
      theme: {
        container: {
          center: true,
          padding: {
            DEFAULT: '1rem',
            sm: '2rem',
            lg: '4rem',
            xl: '5rem',
            '2xl': '6rem',
          },
        },
      },
    };
```

From here you can still override the container class defaults using utilities but with a default that is sensible for your project.

The Tailwind Official Docs has a section specifically for customizing centering and padding styles, see here for details: [https://tailwindcss.com/docs/container#customizing](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/container#customizing).

#### Verify your content entries

The scaffold is configured to look for all of the most common templates and file patterns that you might use a Tailwind class inside of. You should review the content configuration in `tailwind.config.js` and add any additional entries that make sense for your project.

Any template files located in the project root must be included manually. See FAQ for details.

### FAQs

#### Why aren't we using a glob pattern for content? Why do I need to add templates in the theme root manually?

The short answer is that Webpack (among others) doesn't support the glob option when registering PostCSS dependencies. Using wildcards in globs (e.g. `single-*.php`) will not work as expected when targeting the root project folder.

Files located in subfolders can be accessed via globs and those are already included by default in the scaffold.

#### How do I add the Gutenberg color palette automatically to the Tailwind config?
By default the toolkit will look if `theme.json` is present and if so, attempt to `import` colors from the palette you've defined in it. You can also optionally specify that you want to bring in the color palette for blocks (all or specific ones) by passing in either `true` or an array of allowed block names to the `getThemeColors()` function called in `tailwind.config.js`.

#### How is writing `@apply` more efficient than writing regular CSS?
Similar to regular CSS shorthand, in Tailwind there are several ways to more efficiently write CSS. `@apply` needs to be added once per custom class definition and can be chained with multiple utilities (there's no need to re-write `@apply` for every utility).

For example:
```
.my-custom-class {
	@apply m-6 p-6 bg-white hover:bg-black md:p-8;
}

\\ Writing the regular css equivalent would be something like...

.my-custom-class {
	margin: 1.5rem;
	padding: 1.5rem;
	background-color: white;

	&:hover {
		background-color: black;
	}

	@media (min-width: 768px) {
		padding: 2rem;
	}
}
```

Another example with serveral media queries:
```
// This is getting quite long and hard to read

.my-custom-class {
	@apply m-6 p-6 bg-white hover:bg-black md:p-8 md:m-8 md:bg-blue md:hover:bg-white;
}

// A cleaner way to write this in Tailwind would be

.my-custom-class {
	@apply m-6 p-6 bg-white hover:bg-black;

	@screen md {
		@apply p-8 m-8 bg-blue hover:bg-white;
	}
}

```

Once you get a hang of the Tailwind class names (and are using Intellisence Vscode plugin),the Tailwind options can be much more efficient to write. But, of course use your best judgement, as you would for regular CSS.

#### Why aren’t my Tailwind classes outputting?
Tailwind’s JIT engine generates the styles you need for your project on-demand, however there may be some edge cases where extra configuration is required. Most often custom tailwind classes or dynamic classes need extra attention.

By default, only the classes you actually use will be included in your production CSS file. Any files covered in your “content” settings will be scanned for classes to include in the CSS file output.

If you want to have classes always included in the output, they need to be written outside of an `@layer` block or added to the safelist.

#### How do I ensure my custom class outputs in the JIT compiler?
- Make sure your `content` configuration in your `tailwind.config.js` file is correct and matches all of the right source files.
- Make sure you define the class without using `@layer`. Just write it in your CSS file like you normally would and include it in the appropriate folder (component, template, utility).
- If you define a custom class in your Tailwind configuration, that class must either appear inside your content or you must include it in the `safelist` to be included.
- Ensure your classes are defined directly (i.e. without using concatenation or variables) wherever possible so the compiler can detect them.

```
 var postTypeClass = `article--${postType}` ❌
 var postTypeClass = postType === 'article' ? 'article-post` : `article-page` ✅
```
- If you truly must use a dynamic value (common for spacing utilities) you can use the safelist to make sure those utilities are always included as appropriate.
For example:
```
safelist: [
	{
		pattern: /grid-cols-(2|3|4|5)/,
		variants: ['md', 'lg'],
	},
]
```

See [Safelisting Classes documentation](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/content-configuration#safelisting-classes) for more details.

Any styles defined inside of an `@layer` or inside the `tailwind.config.js` file will be purged if they are not found in your “content” targets (e.g. the files you specify in the content option).

#### What about classes generated from WordPress?
We've got your back. We've already included a safelist of WordPress classes in the `tailwind.config.js` so no need to worry!

#### Tailwind comes with a default theme. Do I need to remove the default values before starting my project?

The short answer is: not necessarily. But the most important question is: why would you want to remove default options (e.g. available fonts, widths, colors, etc, to choose from) at all?

The main reason you would want to take away defaults is to prevent those things from being used in the project. This is commonly done with colors on projects where you actually have a color palette to use as you wouldn’t want to use colors that are off brand. If you have a design that includes a typography scale you should be using that one on the project, not the default from Tailwind.

That said, there are situations where some of the default Tailwind theme options can fill in gaps in your own design. For instance, if you have a color palette, but no typography scale, using Tailwind’s typography scale would be of benefit to you. Similarly, if you have a color palette that is sparse and doesn’t include things like grays, you may want to keep the gray colors but otherwise use only the client’s color palette.

The key takeaway here is that you do not need to limit the configuration for performance reasons. The JIT engine is highly optimized and automatically removes classes you aren’t using that haven’t been added to a safelist. Just think proactively about setting up other developers for success; if removing the option makes contributing to the project easier to do or learn, then it’s probably a good idea.

#### Do I need to use any Tailwind plugins?
By default, the toolkit comes with all four official Tailwind plugins installed and the typography plugin enabled by default. In most cases you'll want to just enable all of these so you can leverage all of their functionality. Any classes from these plugins that you don’t use won’t be included in your project.

### Tailwind Plugins
 Here is a list of the current (at the time of writing) official plugins and how they can help you in your project:

#### Typography Plugin

Adds styles for longform typography sections so you’re not forced to add classes to every element in a content area.

Typically added for quick styling to longform rich text content without a highly specific typography style guide. In most cases there will be project specific sizing for headings and typography, in which case this plugin can be disabled.

[View the official plugin](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins#typography)

#### Forms Plugin

This plugin provides a simple mechanism for styling forms on your project. If you're using a form plugin, you may need to disable it's default style output to avoid conflicts.

This plugin can be used in two modes: default styles or opt-in only. Set in plugin settings.

- Default: Styles are applied to all form elements automatically (recommended)
- By default the form styles will always be in your CSS output since the compiler can’t tell if you’re actually using forms on the page somewhere or not. In general this is what you’d want anyway.
- Opt-in: Scopes all styles to classes (e.g. form-input, form-checkbox, etc).

[View the official plugin](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins#forms)

#### Aspect Ratio Plugin
Adds utility classes to control a fixed [aspect ratio](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/a/aspect-ratio/) to elements (e.g. 16:9, 4:3, etc) using the `aspect-ratio` CSS property (supported in all modern browsers).

[View the official plugin](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins#aspect-ratio)

#### Line Clamp Plugin
Adds utility classes to support the [CSS line-clamp](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/l/line-clamp/) property.

This allows you to truncate text to a certain number of lines via styles, which is helpful for certain layouts.

[View the official plugin](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins#line-clamp)

See the [Tailwind Plugins page](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins) for further information.
